Experimental design: the science and subfield of statistics about how to collect data effectively.


Define the problem or research question you aim to address
    Asking the right questions before solving a problem is a great start
    Important to be specific

For most data science applications, it comes down to predicting the uture
    We answer the question: given set of options, whcih maximizes optimization criteria?

Optimization criteria: objective or goal function --> we want to achieve

Control vs Treatment group
    control = no changes
    treatment = group with change

Independent variable are factors that may influence outcome
Dependent variable is what you observe (outcome)

Confounder variable
    Extraneous variables/extenral factors that may influence the outcome
    Can affect IV-DV relationships and distort results if not controlled
    Not the sutdy focus but must be managed for valid conclusions

Ways to deal with Confounder
    Design stage (before data collection)
        Sampling vs randomization
            Randomization is randomly assigning participatns to the control group and the treatment group. This
            minimizes system confounding, reduces the risk fo bias in either group being enriched for confounders, and help distribute confounding variables equally.
        Restriction
        Matching
            Pair participants with similar confounder values across groups.
    

Observational Studies
    Cross sectional Studies
        Collects data from many different individuals at one specific single point of time
    Retrospective (case control) Studies
        Look back at past events to examine the relationship between exposure and outcome
    Prospective (longtitudinal or cohort studies)

A common method to minimize bias in experimental design is Binding
    When the people involved ina n experiment don't know who's getting the real treatment and who's not. It is a technique used to make the subjects "blind" to which treatment or placebo they ar ebeing given. 
    - Single-binding is when either the participants or researchers don't know
    - Double binding is when both don't know.

Identify which method for collecting data (observational study, experiment, simulation, or survey) is best in each following situation and explain

1. The effect of a severe earthquake would have on the Salt Lake Valley.
    Simulation
2. Whether or not a certian coupon attached to the outside of a catalog makes recipients more likely to order products from a mail-order company.
    Experiment
3. Whether or not smoking has an effect on coronary heart disease.
    Observational study
4. Determining the average household income of homes in Salt Lake City.
    Survey